_Pol.	 	
(greatly softened_). Alas!--I do--indeed I pity thee.	  
	 	
_Cas_.            And Lalage--			
			
_Pol_.            _Scoundrel!--arise and die!_	  
  	
_Cas_.            It needeth not be--thus--thus--Oh, let me die   
                  Thus on my bended knee. It were most fitting 	 
                  That in this deep humiliation I perish.	 	
                  For in the fight I will not raise a hand 	 
                  Against thee, Earl of Leicester. Strike thou home-- 	 
               (_baring his bosom_.)			
                  Here is no let or hindrance to thy weapon--			
                  Strike home. I _will not_ fight thee.			
			
_Pol_.            Now's Death and Hell! 	 
                  Am I not--am I not sorely--grievously tempted	  
                  To take thee at thy word? But mark me, sir:  	
                  Think not to fly me thus. Do thou prepare 		
                  For public insult in the streets--before   
                  The eyes of the citizens. I'll follow thee-- 	 
                  Like an avenging spirit I'll follow thee  	
                  Even unto death. Before those whom thou lovest-- 	 
                  Before all Rome I'll taunt thee, villain,--I'll taunt	  
                    thee, 		
                  Dost hear? with _cowardice_--thou _wilt not_ fight me? 		
                  Thou liest! thou _shalt_!	 	
			
                  (_Exit_.)		 
  	
_Cas_.            Now this indeed is just!			
                  Most righteous, and most just, avenging Heaven!	  
	  
			
  	
[Footnote 1: By Sir Thomas Wyatt.--Ed.]			
 	 
 	 
  	
	  
 		
       *       *       *       *       *  	
	 	
			
		 
 	 
			
NOTE ON POLITIAN	  
			
20. Such portions of "Politian" as are known to the public first saw the	 	
light of publicity in the 'Southern Literary Messenger' for December   
1835 and January 1836, being styled "Scenes from Politian; an	  
unpublished drama." These scenes were included, unaltered, in the 1845		 
collection of Poems by Poe. The larger portion of the original draft 		
subsequently became the property of the present editor, but it is not 	 
considered just to the poet's memory to publish it. The work is a hasty		 
and unrevised production of its author's earlier days of literary labor;			
and, beyond the scenes already known, scarcely calculated to enhance his			
reputation. As a specimen, however, of the parts unpublished, the  	
following fragment from the first scene of Act II. may be offered. The		 
Duke, it should be premised, is uncle to Alessandra, and father of		 
Castiglione her betrothed. 		
 	 
	  
		 
_Duke_.           Why do you laugh?	 	
  	
_Castiglione_.    Indeed.   
                  I hardly know myself. Stay! Was it not			
                  On yesterday we were speaking of the Earl? 		
                  Of the Earl Politian? Yes! it was yesterday.			
                  Alessandra, you and I, you must remember!	  
                  We were walking in the garden. 		
  	
_Duke_.           Perfectly.  	
                  I do remember it--what of it--what then?	 	
 	 
_Cas_.            O nothing--nothing at all.  	
 		
_Duke_.           Nothing at all!		 
                  It is most singular that you should laugh			
                  At nothing at all!			
  	
_Cas_.            Most singular--singular! 		
 	 
_Duke_.           Look yon, Castiglione, be so kind 	 
                  As tell me, sir, at once what 'tis you mean.  	
                  What are you talking of?	  
 	 
_Cas_.            Was it not so?			
                  We differed in opinion touching him.  	
   
_Duke_.           Him!--Whom? 		
 		
_Cas_.            Why, sir, the Earl Politian.			
	  
_Duke_.           The Earl of Leicester! Yes!--is it he you mean?	  
                  We differed, indeed. If I now recollect	 	
                  The words you used were that the Earl you knew  	
                  Was neither learned nor mirthful.   
 	 
_Cas_.            Ha! ha!--now did I?  	
 		
_Duke_.           That did you, sir, and well I knew at the time	  
                  You were wrong, it being not the character	 	
                  Of the Earl--whom all the world allows to be	 	
                  A most hilarious man. Be not, my son,  	
                  Too positive again.   
 	 
_Cas_.            'Tis singular! 	 
                  Most singular! I could not think it possible  	
                  So little time could so much alter one!		 
                  To say the truth about an hour ago,			
                  As I was walking with the Count San Ozzo,			
                  All arm in arm, we met this very man	 	
                  The Earl--he, with his friend Baldazzar,  	
                  Having just arrived in Rome. Ha! ha! he _is_ altered! 		
                  Such an account he gave me of his journey! 		
                  'Twould have made you die with laughter--such tales he			
                    told	 	
                  Of his caprices and his merry freaks	  
                  Along the road--such oddity--such humor--	 	
                  Such wit--such whim--such flashes of wild merriment  	
                  Set off too in such full relief by the grave	 	
                  Demeanor of his friend--who, to speak the truth 	 
                  Was gravity itself-- 	 
 	 
_Duke_.           Did I not tell you?	  
			
_Cas_.            You did--and yet 'tis strange! but true, as strange, 		
                  How much I was mistaken! I always thought  	
                  The Earl a gloomy man.	 	
 	 
_Duke_.           So, so, you see!  	
                  Be not too positive. Whom have we here?	 	
                  It cannot be the Earl?		 
			
_Cas_.            The Earl! Oh no!			
                  Tis not the Earl--but yet it is--and leaning  	
                  Upon his friend Baldazzar. Ah! welcome, sir!   
                  (_Enter Politian and Baldazzar_.)		 
                  My lord, a second welcome let me give you  	
                  To Rome--his Grace the Duke of Broglio. 	 
                  Father! this is the Earl Politian, Earl	  
                  Of Leicester in Great Britain.	  
                  [_Politian bows haughtily_.]	 	
                  That, his friend  	
                  Baldazzar, Duke of Surrey. The Earl has letters,		 
                  So please you, for Your Grace.		 
 		
_Duke_.           Ha! ha! Most welcome 	 
                  To Rome and to our palace, Earl Politian!	  
                  And you, most noble Duke! I am glad to see you! 		
                  I knew your father well, my Lord Politian. 		
                  Castiglione! call your cousin hither,	 	
                  And let me make the noble Earl acquainted			
                  With your betrothed. You come, sir, at a time			
                  Most seasonable. The wedding--  	
	  
_Politian_.       Touching those letters, sir,		 
                  Your son made mention of--your son, is he not?--  	
                  Touching those letters, sir, I wot not of them.	 	
                  If such there be, my friend Baldazzar here--	  
                  Baldazzar! ah!--my friend Baldazzar here		 
                  Will hand them to Your Grace. I would retire.			
 		
_Duke_.           Retire!--so soon?			
	  
_Cas_.            What ho! Benito! Rupert!	 	
                  His lordship's chambers--show his lordship to them!	 	
                  His lordship is unwell.   
		 
             (_Enter Benito_.) 		
 		
_Ben_.            This way, my lord!			
	  
             (_Exit, followed by Politian_.) 		
 		
_Duke_.           Retire! Unwell!  	
	 	
_Bal_.            So please you, sir. I fear me 	 
                  'Tis as you say--his lordship is unwell. 		
                  The damp air of the evening--the fatigue		 
                  Of a long journey--the--indeed I had better	  
                  Follow his lordship. He must be unwell.		 
                  I will return anon.			
   
_Duke_.           Return anon! 		
                  Now this is very strange! Castiglione! 		
                  This way, my son, I wish to speak with thee. 		
                  You surely were mistaken in what you said			
                  Of the Earl, mirthful, indeed!--which of us said	  
                  Politian was a melancholy man? 	 
			
                 (_Exeunt_.)  	
   
 		
 		
			
	  
       *       *       *       *       *			
  	
  	
			
 	 
  	
                           POEMS OF YOUTH	 	
	  
 		
 		
   
 		
       *       *       *       *       * 		
 		
			
	  
	  
  	
INTRODUCTION TO POEMS.--1831.   
	 	
 	 
LETTER TO MR. B--.  	
 		
"WEST POINT, 1831		 
			
"DEAR B--			
  	
... 		
		 
Believing only a portion of my former volume to be worthy a second 	 
edition--that small portion I thought it as well to include in the		 
present book as to republish by itself. I have therefore herein combined	  
'Al Aaraaf' and 'Tamerlane' with other poems hitherto unprinted. Nor 		
have I hesitated to insert from the 'Minor Poems,' now omitted, whole  	
lines, and even passages, to the end that being placed in a fairer	 	
light, and the trash shaken from them in which they were imbedded, they			
may have some chance of being seen by posterity.		 
  	
"It has been said that a good critique on a poem may be written by one 		
who is no poet himself. This, according to _your_ idea and _mine_ of	  
poetry, I feel to be false--the less poetical the critic, the less just			
the critique, and the converse. On this account, and because there are	 	
but few B----s in the world, I would be as much ashamed of the world's   
good opinion as proud of your own. Another than yourself might here		 
observe, 'Shakespeare is in possession of the world's good opinion, and 	 
yet Shakespeare is the greatest of poets. It appears then that the world 	 
judge correctly, why should you be ashamed of their favorable judgment?'	  
The difficulty lies in the interpretation of the word 'judgment' or	  
'opinion.' The opinion is the world's, truly, but it may be called	 	
theirs as a man would call a book his, having bought it; he did not	 	
write the book, but it is his; they did not originate the opinion, but  	
it is theirs. A fool, for example, thinks Shakespeare a great poet--yet   
the fool has never read Shakespeare. But the fool's neighbor, who is a		 
step higher on the Andes of the mind, whose head (that is to say, his 		
more exalted thought) is too far above the fool to be seen or   
understood, but whose feet (by which I mean his every-day actions) are		 
sufficiently near to be discerned, and by means of which that	  
superiority is ascertained, which _but_ for them would never have been			
discovered--this neighbor asserts that Shakespeare is a great poet--the	 	
fool believes him, and it is henceforward his _opinion_. This neighbor's			
own opinion has, in like manner, been adopted from one above _him_, and		 
so, ascendingly, to a few gifted individuals who kneel around the 		
summit, beholding, face to face, the master spirit who stands upon the		 
pinnacle.	  
	  
"You are aware of the great barrier in the path of an American writer. 		
He is read, if at all, in preference to the combined and established wit  	
of the world. I say established; for it is with literature as with law	 	
or empire--an established name is an estate in tenure, or a throne in			
possession. Besides, one might suppose that books, like their authors, 		
improve by travel--their having crossed the sea is, with us, so great a			
distinction. Our antiquaries abandon time for distance; our very fops	  
glance from the binding to the bottom of the title-page, where the	 	
mystic characters which spell London, Paris, or Genoa, are precisely so	 	
many letters of recommendation.  	
   
"I mentioned just now a vulgar error as regards criticism. I think the			
notion that no poet can form a correct estimate of his own writings is 		
another. I remarked before that in proportion to the poetical talent			
would be the justice of a critique upon poetry. Therefore a bad poet		 
would, I grant, make a false critique, and his self-love would 		
infallibly bias his little judgment in his favor; but a poet, who is 		
indeed a poet, could not, I think, fail of making a just critique;	 	
whatever should be deducted on the score of self-love might be replaced			
on account of his intimate acquaintance with the subject; in short, we		 
have more instances of false criticism than of just where one's own  	
writings are the test, simply because we have more bad poets than good.   
There are, of course, many objections to what I say: Milton is a great	  
example of the contrary; but his opinion with respect to the 'Paradise		 
Regained' is by no means fairly ascertained. By what trivial	 	
circumstances men are often led to assert what they do not really  	
believe! Perhaps an inadvertent word has descended to posterity. But, in	 	
fact, the 'Paradise Regained' is little, if at all, inferior to the 	 
'Paradise Lost,' and is only supposed so to be because men do not like 	 
epics, whatever they may say to the contrary, and reading those of	  
Milton in their natural order, are too much wearied with the first to	  
derive any pleasure from the second. 		
  	
"I dare say Milton preferred 'Comus' to either--if so--justly.	 	
			
"As I am speaking of poetry, it will not be amiss to touch slightly upon		 
the most singular heresy in its modern history--the heresy of what is  	
called, very foolishly, the Lake School. Some years ago I might have 		
been induced, by an occasion like the present, to attempt a formal	  
refutation of their doctrine; at present it would be a work of	 	
supererogation. The wise must bow to the wisdom of such men as Coleridge	 	
and Southey, but being wise, have laughed at poetical theories so  	
prosaically exemplified.  	
 	 
"Aristotle, with singular assurance, has declared poetry the most 		
philosophical of all writings--but it required a Wordsworth to pronounce 	 
it the most metaphysical. He seems to think that the end of poetry is,		 
or should be, instruction; yet it is a truism that the end of our			
existence is happiness; if so, the end of every separate part of our			
existence, everything connected with our existence, should be still   
happiness. Therefore the end of instruction should be happiness; and	 	
happiness is another name for pleasure;--therefore the end of		 
instruction should be pleasure: yet we see the above-mentioned opinion 	 
implies precisely the reverse.			
	  
"To proceed: _ceteris paribus_, he who pleases is of more importance to		 
his fellow-men than he who instructs, since utility is happiness, and	 	
pleasure is the end already obtained which instruction is merely the	 	
means of obtaining.			
		 
"I see no reason, then, why our metaphysical poets should plume  	
themselves so much on the utility of their works, unless indeed they   
refer to instruction with eternity in view; in which case, sincere	  
respect for their piety would not allow me to express my contempt for	 	
their judgment; contempt which it would be difficult to conceal, since	 	
their writings are professedly to be understood by the few, and it is  	
the many who stand in need of salvation. In such case I should no doubt   
be tempted to think of the devil in 'Melmoth,' who labors indefatigably,		 
through three octavo volumes, to accomplish the destruction of one or 		
two souls, while any common devil would have demolished one or two 		
thousand.	  
	  
"Against the subtleties which would make poetry a study--not a  	
passion--it becomes the metaphysician to reason--but the poet to   
protest. Yet Wordsworth and Coleridge are men in years; the one imbued	  
in contemplation from his childhood; the other a giant in intellect and 		
learning. The diffidence, then, with which I venture to dispute their 		
authority would be overwhelming did I not feel, from the bottom of my			
heart, that learning has little to do with the imagination--intellect	  
with the passions--or age with poetry.	  
  	
  "'Trifles, like straws, upon the surface flow;  	
  He who would search for pearls must dive below,'	  
			
"are lines which have done much mischief. As regards the greater truths, 		
men oftener err by seeking them at the bottom than at the top; Truth			
lies in the huge abysses where wisdom is sought--not in the palpable	  
palaces where she is found. The ancients were not always right in hiding	  
the goddess in a well; witness the light which Bacon has thrown upon  	
philosophy; witness the principles of our divine faith--that moral   
mechanism by which the simplicity of a child may overbalance the wisdom			
of a man.		 
  	
"We see an instance of Coleridge's liability to err, in his 'Biographia			
Literaria'--professedly his literary life and opinions, but, in fact, a	  
treatise 'de omni scibili et quibusdam aliis'. He goes wrong by reason	  
of his very profundity, and of his error we have a natural type in the  	
contemplation of a star. He who regards it directly and intensely sees,   
it is true, the star, but it is the star without a ray--while he who		 
surveys it less inquisitively is conscious of all for which the star is		 
useful to us below--its brilliancy and its beauty.  	
 		
"As to Wordsworth, I have no faith in him. That he had in youth the	  
feelings of a poet I believe--for there are glimpses of extreme delicacy 	 
in his writings--(and delicacy is the poet's own kingdom--his 'El	 	
Dorado')--but they have the appearance of a better day recollected; and  	
glimpses, at best, are little evidence of present poetic fire; we know   
that a few straggling flowers spring up daily in the crevices of the		 
glacier. 	 
		 
"He was to blame in wearing away his youth in contemplation with the end	  
of poetizing in his manhood. With the increase of his judgment the light 	 
which should make it apparent has faded away. His judgment consequently			
is too correct. This may not be understood,--but the old Goths of   
Germany would have understood it, who used to debate matters of 		
importance to their State twice, once when drunk, and once when 		
sober--sober that they might not be deficient in formality--drunk lest 		
they should be destitute of vigor.			
	  
"The long wordy discussions by which he tries to reason us into 	 
admiration of his poetry, speak very little in his favor: they are full  	
of such assertions as this (I have opened one of his volumes at  	
random)--'Of genius the only proof is the act of doing well what is 		
worthy to be done, and what was never done before;'--indeed? then it 	 
follows that in doing what is 'un'worthy to be done, or what 'has' been 	 
done before, no genius can be evinced; yet the picking of pockets is an 		
unworthy act, pockets have been picked time immemorial, and Barrington,	  
the pick-pocket, in point of genius, would have thought hard of a	  
comparison with William Wordsworth, the poet.			
	 	
"Again, in estimating the merit of certain poems, whether they be			
Ossian's or Macpherson's can surely be of little consequence, yet, in		 
order to prove their worthlessness, Mr. W. has expended many pages in 		
the controversy. 'Tantaene animis?' Can great minds descend to such	 	
absurdity? But worse still: that he may bear down every argument in	  
favor of these poems, he triumphantly drags forward a passage, in his		 
abomination with which he expects the reader to sympathise. It is the	 	
beginning of the epic poem 'Temora.' 'The blue waves of Ullin roll in	 	
light; the green hills are covered with day; trees shake their dusty			
heads in the breeze.' And this--this gorgeous, yet simple imagery, where		 
all is alive and panting with immortality--this, William Wordsworth, the 	 
author of 'Peter Bell,' has 'selected' for his contempt. We shall see   
what better he, in his own person, has to offer. Imprimis:	  
 		
  "'And now she's at the pony's tail,			
  And now she's at the pony's head,  	
  On that side now, and now on this;	 	
  And, almost stifled with her bliss, 	 
  A few sad tears does Betty shed.... 	 
  She pats the pony, where or when  	
  She knows not ... happy Betty Foy!		 
  Oh, Johnny, never mind the doctor!'	  
 		
"Secondly:	 	
			
  "'The dew was falling fast, the--stars began to blink;			
  I heard a voice: it said,--"Drink, pretty creature, drink!" 		
  And, looking o'er the hedge, before me I espied			
  A snow-white mountain lamb, with a maiden at its side.	 	
  No other sheep was near, the lamb was all alone,	 	
  And by a slender cord was tether'd to a stone.'	 	
  	
"Now, we have no doubt this is all true: we _will_ believe it,	  
indeed we will, Mr, W. Is it sympathy for the sheep you wish to excite?			
I love a sheep from the bottom of my heart. 		
			
"But there are occasions, dear B----, there are occasions when even	  
Wordsworth is reasonable. Even Stamboul, it is said, shall have an end,	 	
and the most unlucky blunders must come to a conclusion. Here is an	 	
extract from his preface:   
	 	
  "'Those who have been accustomed to the phraseology of modern writers,			
  if they persist in reading this book to a conclusion (_impossible!_) 		
  will, no doubt, have to struggle with feelings of awkwardness; (ha!			
  ha! ha!) they will look round for poetry (ha! ha! ha! ha!), and will	  
  be induced to inquire by what species of courtesy these attempts have	 	
  been permitted to assume that title.' Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!	 	
   
"Yet, let not Mr. W. despair; he has given immortality to a wagon, and		 
the bee Sophocles has transmitted to eternity a sore toe, and dignified 		
a tragedy with a chorus of turkeys. 		
			
"Of Coleridge, I cannot speak but with reverence. His towering	  
intellect! his gigantic power! To use an author quoted by himself,	  
 		
  '_J'ai trouve souvent que la plupart des sectes ont raison dans une  	
  bonne partie de ce qu'elles avancent, mais non pas en ce qu'elles	 	
  nient_;' 	 
 		
and to employ his own language, he has imprisoned his own conceptions by	  
the barrier he has erected against those of others. It is lamentable to	  
think that such a mind should be buried in metaphysics, and, like the		 
Nyctanthes, waste its perfume upon the night alone. In reading that	 	
man's poetry, I tremble like one who stands upon a volcano, conscious   
from the very darkness bursting from the crater, of the fire and the		 
light that are weltering below. 	 
  	
"What is Poetry?--Poetry! that Proteus-like idea, with as many	  
appellations as the nine-titled Corcyra! 'Give me,' I demanded of a	  
scholar some time ago, 'give me a definition of poetry.'			
'_Tres-volontiers;_' and he proceeded to his library, brought me a Dr.	 	
Johnson, and overwhelmed me with a definition. Shade of the immortal   
Shakespeare! I imagine to myself the scowl of your spiritual eye upon		 
the profanity of that scurrilous Ursa Major. Think of poetry, dear		 
B----, think of poetry, and then think of Dr. Samuel Johnson! Think of   
all that is airy and fairy-like, and then of all that is hideous and		 
unwieldy; think of his huge bulk, the Elephant! and then--and then think		 
of the 'Tempest'--the 'Midsummer Night's Dream'--Prospero--Oberon--and			
Titania!			
   
"A poem, in my opinion, is opposed to a work of science by having, for	 	
its _immediate_ object, pleasure, not truth; to romance, by having, for		 
its object, an _indefinite_ instead of a _definite_ pleasure, being a 	 
poem only so far as this object is attained; romance presenting   
perceptible images with definite, poetry with _in_definite sensations,		 
to which end music is an _essential_, since the comprehension of sweet			
sound is our most indefinite conception. Music, when combined with a			
pleasurable idea, is poetry; music, without the idea, is simply music;  	
the idea, without the music, is prose, from its very definitiveness.			
 	 
"What was meant by the invective against him who had no music in his 		
soul?	 	
	  
"To sum up this long rigmarole, I have, dear B----, what you, no doubt,	  
perceive, for the metaphysical poets as poets, the most sovereign  	
contempt. That they have followers proves nothing:   
		 
  "'No Indian prince has to his palace		 
  More followers than a thief to the gallows.'"  	
 		
		 
			
			
   
       *       *       *       *       *	 	
		 
 	 
			
	  
		 
SONNET--TO SCIENCE.	 	
	 	
			
  SCIENCE! true daughter of Old Time thou art!		 
    Who alterest all things with thy peering eyes. 		
  Why preyest thou thus upon the poet's heart,		 
    Vulture, whose wings are dull realities	  
  How should he love thee? or how deem thee wise,			
    Who wouldst not leave him in his wandering  	
  To seek for treasure in the jewelled skies,   
    Albeit he soared with an undaunted wing!	 	
  Hast thou not dragged Diana from her car?		 
    And driven the Hamadryad from the wood 	 
  To seek a shelter in some happier star?		 
    Hast thou not torn the Naiad from her flood,	  
  The Elfin from the green grass, and from me	  
  The summer dream beneath the tamarind tree?  	
  	
   
1829.			
 	 
 		
		 
			
			
       *       *       *       *       *   
	 	
		 
 	 
			
	  
Private reasons--some of which have reference to the sin of plagiarism,		 
and others to the date of Tennyson's first poems [1]--have induced me,	 	
after some hesitation, to republish these, the crude compositions of my	 	
earliest boyhood. They are printed 'verbatim'--without alteration from			
the original edition--the date of which is too remote to be judiciously		 
acknowledged.--E. A. P. (1845). 		
		 
	  
 	 
[Footnote 1: This refers to the accusation brought against Edgar Poe	 	
that he was a copyist of Tennyson.--Ed.]   
	 	
		 
 	 
			
	  
       *       *       *       *       *		 
	 	
  	
   
		 
  	
AL AARAAF. [1] 		
	  
	 	
	 	
PART I.  	
		 
 	 
  O! nothing earthly save the ray 		
  (Thrown back from flowers) of Beauty's eye,		 
  As in those gardens where the day	  
  Springs from the gems of Circassy-- 	 
  O! nothing earthly save the thrill			
  Of melody in woodland rill--  	
  Or (music of the passion-hearted) 		
  Joy's voice so peacefully departed 	 
  That like the murmur in the shell, 	 
  Its echo dwelleth and will dwell--   
  O! nothing of the dross of ours--	  
  Yet all the beauty--all the flowers	  
  That list our Love, and deck our bowers-- 		
  Adorn yon world afar, afar--	 	
  The wandering star.			
		 
  'Twas a sweet time for Nesace--for there 		
  Her world lay lolling on the golden air,	  
  Near four bright suns--a temporary rest--	  
  An oasis in desert of the blest.	  
  Away away--'mid seas of rays that roll  	
  Empyrean splendor o'er th' unchained soul--  	
  The soul that scarce (the billows are so dense)	 	
  Can struggle to its destin'd eminence--		 
  To distant spheres, from time to time, she rode, 		
  And late to ours, the favour'd one of God-- 	 
  But, now, the ruler of an anchor'd realm,		 
  She throws aside the sceptre--leaves the helm,			
  And, amid incense and high spiritual hymns,			
  Laves in quadruple light her angel limbs.   
	 	
  Now happiest, loveliest in yon lovely Earth,		 
  Whence sprang the "Idea of Beauty" into birth, 	 
  (Falling in wreaths thro' many a startled star,   
  Like woman's hair 'mid pearls, until, afar,		 
  It lit on hills Achaian, and there dwelt),			
  She look'd into Infinity--and knelt.			
  Rich clouds, for canopies, about her curled--   
  Fit emblems of the model of her world--	 	
  Seen but in beauty--not impeding sight-- 	 
  Of other beauty glittering thro' the light--  	
  A wreath that twined each starry form around,	  
  And all the opal'd air in color bound.	  
		 
  All hurriedly she knelt upon a bed	 	
  Of flowers: of lilies such as rear'd the head	 	
  On the fair Capo Deucato [2], and sprang			
  So eagerly around about to hang		 
  Upon the flying footsteps of--deep pride-- 	 
  Of her who lov'd a mortal--and so died [3].		 
  The Sephalica, budding with young bees,	  
  Uprear'd its purple stem around her knees: 		
  And gemmy flower, of Trebizond misnam'd [4]--  	
  Inmate of highest stars, where erst it sham'd	 	
  All other loveliness: its honied dew			
  (The fabled nectar that the heathen knew)		 
  Deliriously sweet, was dropp'd from Heaven, 	 
  And fell on gardens of the unforgiven			
  In Trebizond--and on a sunny flower		 
  So like its own above that, to this hour, 		
  It still remaineth, torturing the bee			
  With madness, and unwonted reverie:  	
  In Heaven, and all its environs, the leaf		 
  And blossom of the fairy plant, in grief 		
  Disconsolate linger--grief that hangs her head,   
  Repenting follies that full long have fled,			
  Heaving her white breast to the balmy air,		 
  Like guilty beauty, chasten'd, and more fair: 		
  Nyctanthes too, as sacred as the light			
  She fears to perfume, perfuming the night:  	
  And Clytia [5] pondering between many a sun, 		
  While pettish tears adown her petals run:			
  And that aspiring flower that sprang on Earth [6]--  	
  And died, ere scarce exalted into birth,	  
  Bursting its odorous heart in spirit to wing	  
  Its way to Heaven, from garden of a king:			
  And Valisnerian lotus thither flown [7]  	
  From struggling with the waters of the Rhone:  	
  And thy most lovely purple perfume, Zante [8]! 		
  Isola d'oro!--Fior di Levante! 		
  And the Nelumbo bud that floats for ever [9]  	
  With Indian Cupid down the holy river--   
  Fair flowers, and fairy! to whose care is given		 
  To bear the Goddess' song, in odors, up to Heaven [10]: 	 
  	
    "Spirit! that dwellest where,	  
      In the deep sky,			
    The terrible and fair, 	 
      In beauty vie! 		
    Beyond the line of blue--	 	
      The boundary of the star	  
    Which turneth at the view			
      Of thy barrier and thy bar--	 	
    Of the barrier overgone  	
      By the comets who were cast 	 
    From their pride, and from their throne 		
      To be drudges till the last--  	
    To be carriers of fire	  
      (The red fire of their heart)	  
    With speed that may not tire		 
      And with pain that shall not part--  	
    Who livest--_that_ we know--  	
      In Eternity--we feel--	 	
    But the shadow of whose brow			
      What spirit shall reveal?  	
    Tho' the beings whom thy Nesace,		 
      Thy messenger hath known	  
    Have dream'd for thy Infinity  	
      A model of their own [11]-- 		
    Thy will is done, O God!	 	
      The star hath ridden high   
    Thro' many a tempest, but she rode		 
      Beneath thy burning eye; 	 
    And here, in thought, to thee--  	
      In thought that can alone	 	
    Ascend thy empire and so be		 
      A partner of thy throne--  	
    By winged Fantasy [12], 		
       My embassy is given,		 
    Till secrecy shall knowledge be		 
      In the environs of Heaven."  	
 		
  She ceas'd--and buried then her burning cheek	  
  Abash'd, amid the lilies there, to seek			
  A shelter from the fervor of His eye; 		
  For the stars trembled at the Deity.	 	
  She stirr'd not--breath'd not--for a voice was there   
  How solemnly pervading the calm air! 	 
  A sound of silence on the startled ear 		
  Which dreamy poets name "the music of the sphere."	  
  Ours is a world of words: Quiet we call	 	
  "Silence"--which is the merest word of all. 		
	 	
  All Nature speaks, and ev'n ideal things 		
  Flap shadowy sounds from the visionary wings-- 	 
  But ah! not so when, thus, in realms on high		 
  The eternal voice of God is passing by,  	
  And the red winds are withering in the sky!   
  "What tho' in worlds which sightless cycles run [13],	 	
  Link'd to a little system, and one sun--  	
  Where all my love is folly, and the crowd			
  Still think my terrors but the thunder cloud, 	 
  The storm, the earthquake, and the ocean-wrath	 	
  (Ah! will they cross me in my angrier path?) 		
  What tho' in worlds which own a single sun   
  The sands of time grow dimmer as they run,		 
  Yet thine is my resplendency, so given	  
  To bear my secrets thro' the upper Heaven.	 	
  Leave tenantless thy crystal home, and fly, 		
  With all thy train, athwart the moony sky-- 	 
  Apart--like fire-flies in Sicilian night [14],	  
  And wing to other worlds another light!		 
  Divulge the secrets of thy embassy		 
  To the proud orbs that twinkle--and so be  	
  To ev'ry heart a barrier and a ban		 
  Lest the stars totter in the guilt of man!"	 	
  	
   Up rose the maiden in the yellow night,	 	
  The single-mooned eve!-on earth we plight 	 
  Our faith to one love--and one moon adore-- 	 
  The birth-place of young Beauty had no more. 		
  As sprang that yellow star from downy hours, 		
  Up rose the maiden from her shrine of flowers,		 
  And bent o'er sheeny mountain and dim plain 	 
  Her way--but left not yet her Therasaean reign [15].			
	  
			
 	 
PART II.	 	
	 	
	 	
  High on a mountain of enamell'd head-- 		
  Such as the drowsy shepherd on his bed			
  Of giant pasturage lying at his ease,	  
  Raising his heavy eyelid, starts and sees			
  With many a mutter'd "hope to be forgiven"		 
  What time the moon is quadrated in Heaven-- 		
  Of rosy head, that towering far away 	 
  Into the sunlit ether, caught the ray	 	
  Of sunken suns at eve--at noon of night,	  
  While the moon danc'd with the fair stranger light--	 	
  Uprear'd upon such height arose a pile 	 
  Of gorgeous columns on th' uuburthen'd air,	  
  Flashing from Parian marble that twin smile 	 
  Far down upon the wave that sparkled there, 		
  And nursled the young mountain in its lair.  	
  Of molten stars their pavement, such as fall [16]		 
  Thro' the ebon air, besilvering the pall 		
  Of their own dissolution, while they die--	 	
  Adorning then the dwellings of the sky.  	
  A dome, by linked light from Heaven let down,			
  Sat gently on these columns as a crown-- 		
  A window of one circular diamond, there,   
  Look'd out above into the purple air			
  And rays from God shot down that meteor chain		 
  And hallow'd all the beauty twice again, 		
  Save when, between th' Empyrean and that ring,			
  Some eager spirit flapp'd his dusky wing. 	 
  But on the pillars Seraph eyes have seen		 
  The dimness of this world: that grayish green 	 
  That Nature loves the best for Beauty's grave  	
  Lurk'd in each cornice, round each architrave--		 
  And every sculptured cherub thereabout	 	
  That from his marble dwelling peered out,	 	
  Seem'd earthly in the shadow of his niche-- 		
  Achaian statues in a world so rich?   
  Friezes from Tadmor and Persepolis [17]--	  
  From Balbec, and the stilly, clear abyss			
  Of beautiful Gomorrah! Oh, the wave [18]  	
  Is now upon thee--but too late to save!	  
  Sound loves to revel in a summer night:	  
  Witness the murmur of the gray twilight		 
  That stole upon the ear, in Eyraco [19],  	
  Of many a wild star-gazer long ago--  	
  That stealeth ever on the ear of him 		
  Who, musing, gazeth on the distance dim,		 
  And sees the darkness coming as a cloud--		 
  Is not its form--its voice--most palpable and loud?  [20]	  
   But what is this?--it cometh--and it brings	  
  A music with it--'tis the rush of wings-- 	 
  A pause--and then a sweeping, falling strain,  	
  And Nesace is in her halls again.	  
  From the wild energy of wanton haste 		
  Her cheeks were flushing, and her lips apart;		 
  The zone that clung around her gentle waist 	 
  Had burst beneath the heaving of her heart.	  
  Within the centre of that hall to breathe	 	
  She paus'd and panted, Zanthe! all beneath, 	 
  The fairy light that kiss'd her golden hair 		
  And long'd to rest, yet could but sparkle there!  	
	 	
  Young flowers were whispering in melody [21] 	 
  To happy flowers that night--and tree to tree;	 	
  Fountains were gushing music as they fell 	 
  In many a star-lit grove, or moon-light dell;	  
  Yet silence came upon material things--	  
  Fair flowers, bright waterfalls and angel wings--			
  And sound alone that from the spirit sprang	  
  Bore burthen to the charm the maiden sang:	 	
 	 
    "Neath blue-bell or streamer-- 		
      Or tufted wild spray	 	
    That keeps, from the dreamer,	  
      The moonbeam away--[22] 		
    Bright beings! that ponder,	 	
      With half-closing eyes, 	 
    On the stars which your wonder		 
      Hath drawn from the skies, 		
    Till they glance thro' the shade, and  	
      Come down to your brow 	 
    Like--eyes of the maiden	 	
      Who calls on you now-- 		
    Arise! from your dreaming	 	
      In violet bowers, 		
    To duty beseeming		 
      These star-litten hours-- 	 
    And shake from your tresses		 
      Encumber'd with dew		 
	 	
    The breath of those kisses	 	
      That cumber them too--	 	
    (O! how, without you, Love! 		
      Could angels be blest?)   
    Those kisses of true love 	 
      That lull'd ye to rest! 		
    Up! shake from your wing	  
      Each hindering thing:		 
    The dew of the night-- 	 
      It would weigh down your flight;			
    And true love caresses--  	
      O! leave them apart!	 	
    They are light on the tresses, 	 
      But lead on the heart.   
			
    Ligeia! Ligeia!		 
      My beautiful one!	 	
    Whose harshest idea  	
      Will to melody run, 	 
    O! is it thy will	  
      On the breezes to toss? 	 
    Or, capriciously still,	  
      Like the lone Albatross, [23]			
    Incumbent on night	  
      (As she on the air)  	
    To keep watch with delight			
      On the harmony there?  	
 		
    Ligeia! wherever		 
      Thy image may be,		 
    No magic shall sever			
      Thy music from thee.		 
    Thou hast bound many eyes  	
      In a dreamy sleep--	 	
    But the strains still arise  	
      Which _thy_ vigilance keep--   
		 
    The sound of the rain 	 
      Which leaps down to the flower,  	
    And dances again	 	
      In the rhythm of the shower-- 		
    The murmur that springs [24] 		
      From the growing of grass   
    Are the music of things--			
      But are modell'd, alas!			
    Away, then, my dearest,  	
      O! hie thee away	  
    To springs that lie clearest	 	
      Beneath the moon-ray--	 	
    To lone lake that smiles,	 	
      In its dream of deep rest,   
    At the many star-isles	 	
    That enjewel its breast--		 
    Where wild flowers, creeping,  	
      Have mingled their shade,			
    On its margin is sleeping			
      Full many a maid--	 	
    Some have left the cool glade, and 		
      Have slept with the bee--[25] 	 
    Arouse them, my maiden,	 	
      On moorland and lea--			
   
    Go! breathe on their slumber,			
      All softly in ear,	 	
    The musical number			
      They slumber'd to hear-- 		
    For what can awaken   
      An angel so soon		 
    Whose sleep hath been taken		 
      Beneath the cold moon,		 
    As the spell which no slumber 	 
      Of witchery may test,	  
    The rhythmical number	  
      Which lull'd him to rest?" 		
 	 
  Spirits in wing, and angels to the view,			
  A thousand seraphs burst th' Empyrean thro',		 
  Young dreams still hovering on their drowsy flight-- 	 
  Seraphs in all but "Knowledge," the keen light		 
  That fell, refracted, thro' thy bounds afar,	  
  O death! from eye of God upon that star;			
  Sweet was that error--sweeter still that death-- 		
  Sweet was that error--ev'n with _us_ the breath 		
  Of Science dims the mirror of our joy-- 		
  To them 'twere the Simoom, and would destroy--		 
  For what (to them) availeth it to know	 	
  That Truth is Falsehood--or that Bliss is Woe?   
  Sweet was their death--with them to die was rife		 
  With the last ecstasy of satiate life--  	
  Beyond that death no immortality--			
  But sleep that pondereth and is not "to be"--	  
  And there--oh! may my weary spirit dwell-- 		
  Apart from Heaven's Eternity--and yet how far from Hell! [26]		 
		 
  What guilty spirit, in what shrubbery dim			
  Heard not the stirring summons of that hymn?	 	
  But two: they fell: for heaven no grace imparts		 
  To those who hear not for their beating hearts. 		
  A maiden-angel and her seraph-lover-- 		
  O! where (and ye may seek the wide skies over)	 	
  Was Love, the blind, near sober Duty known? 	 
  Unguided Love hath fallen--'mid "tears of perfect moan." [27]			
		 
  He was a goodly spirit--he who fell:	 	
  A wanderer by mossy-mantled well--		 
  A gazer on the lights that shine above--  	
  A dreamer in the moonbeam by his love:   
  What wonder? for each star is eye-like there,			
  And looks so sweetly down on Beauty's hair--		 
  And they, and ev'ry mossy spring were holy 		
  To his love-haunted heart and melancholy. 		
  The night had found (to him a night of wo)	 	
  Upon a mountain crag, young Angelo--		 
  Beetling it bends athwart the solemn sky,	 	
  And scowls on starry worlds that down beneath it lie. 		
  Here sate he with his love--his dark eye bent	 	
  With eagle gaze along the firmament:		 
  Now turn'd it upon her--but ever then	 	
  It trembled to the orb of EARTH again.   
	  
  "Ianthe, dearest, see! how dim that ray!			
  How lovely 'tis to look so far away!  	
  She seemed not thus upon that autumn eve   
  I left her gorgeous halls--nor mourned to leave,	 	
  That eve--that eve--I should remember well-- 	 
  The sun-ray dropped, in Lemnos with a spell			
  On th' Arabesque carving of a gilded hall	 	
  Wherein I sate, and on the draperied wall--		 
  And on my eyelids--O, the heavy light! 	 
  How drowsily it weighed them into night! 		
  On flowers, before, and mist, and love they ran   
  With Persian Saadi in his Gulistan: 		
  But O, that light!--I slumbered--Death, the while,		 
  Stole o'er my senses in that lovely isle			
  So softly that no single silken hair 	 
  Awoke that slept--or knew that he was there.	  
	  
  "The last spot of Earth's orb I trod upon	 	
  Was a proud temple called the Parthenon; [28] 	 
  More beauty clung around her columned wall		 
  Then even thy glowing bosom beats withal, [29]			
  And when old Time my wing did disenthral  	
  Thence sprang I--as the eagle from his tower,	 	
  And years I left behind me in an hour.	 	
  What time upon her airy bounds I hung,	 	
  One half the garden of her globe was flung 		
  Unrolling as a chart unto my view--	  
  Tenantless cities of the desert too! 		
  Ianthe, beauty crowded on me then,		 
  And half I wished to be again of men."		 
			
  "My Angelo! and why of them to be?		 
  A brighter dwelling-place is here for thee--  	
  And greener fields than in yon world above,	 	
  And woman's loveliness--and passionate love." 	 
  "But list, Ianthe! when the air so soft 	 
  Failed, as my pennoned spirit leapt aloft, [30]		 
  Perhaps my brain grew dizzy--but the world 		
  I left so late was into chaos hurled,	  
  Sprang from her station, on the winds apart,		 
  And rolled a flame, the fiery Heaven athwart. 	 
  Methought, my sweet one, then I ceased to soar,  	
  And fell--not swiftly as I rose before, 	 
  But with a downward, tremulous motion thro' 		
  Light, brazen rays, this golden star unto! 	 
  Nor long the measure of my falling hours,			
  For nearest of all stars was thine to ours--   
  Dread star! that came, amid a night of mirth,	 	
  A red Daedalion on the timid Earth."  	
	 	
  "We came--and to thy Earth--but not to us  	
  Be given our lady's bidding to discuss:			
  We came, my love; around, above, below, 	 
  Gay fire-fly of the night we come and go,	 	
  Nor ask a reason save the angel-nod	  
  _She_ grants to us as granted by her God--	 	
  But, Angelo, than thine gray Time unfurled 	 
  Never his fairy wing o'er fairer world!  	
  Dim was its little disk, and angel eyes   
  Alone could see the phantom in the skies, 	 
  When first Al Aaraaf knew her course to be		 
  Headlong thitherward o'er the starry sea--  	
  But when its glory swelled upon the sky,  	
  As glowing Beauty's bust beneath man's eye,	  
  We paused before the heritage of men,	 	
  And thy star trembled--as doth Beauty then!"	 	
  			 		  			 		 		  	 	  	 		 	 			   	 	 		 			   				  				 	  		   	    	 		   	  		    				 	 	  		   	 				  	  		  	 	 			  	   		   				  			  	 		    	 				  	  	   		   			 	  		 	 		  	   	 	 	 	 	 					 	  	    				 	 		 	 	 				  		  	   			 		  	 	 	    				  	   		 		 				  		 	 	    	 		  	    	    		 		  		 			  					   			 	 	 			 	    				  	  	 	   	   		   					    	 				 	 	